Notion-like template docs (#302)
ueberdosis/tiptap-docs: src/content/ui-components/templates/notion-editor.mdx

---
title: Notion-like
meta:
  title: Notion-like | Tiptap UI Components
  description: A Notion-style Tiptap editor with collaboration, AI, and rich UI components. Fully customizable and easy to integrate.
  category: UI Components
sidebars:
  hideSecondary: true
---

import { ArrowRightIcon } from 'lucide-react'
import { CodeDemo } from '@/components/CodeDemo'
import { Button } from '@/components/ui/Button'
import { Link } from '@/components/Link'
import { Callout } from '@/components/ui/Callout'

> The **Notion-like Editor Template** is a fully featured Tiptap setup that replicates the familiar Notion experience. It supports collaboration, AI assistance, emoji, drag & drop, advanced formatting—and it’s fully customizable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Notion-like Editor Template** is a fully featured block-based editor that replicates the familiar Notion experience. It supports collaboration, AI assistance, emoji, drag & drop, advanced formatting—and it’s fully customizable.
```

<CodeDemo isLarge src="https://template.tiptap.dev/preview/templates/notion-like" />

## Installation

Install the Notion-like editor with the Tiptap CLI:

```bash
npx @tiptap/cli add notion-like-editor
```

## Styling

<Callout title="Missing styles?" variant="info">
  If the editor doesn&apos;t look right, make sure you&apos;ve followed the [style setup
  guide](/ui-components/getting-started/style).
</Callout>

## Configuration

> Before enabling AI or collaboration, configure the required constants inside `tiptap-collab-utils.ts`.

Reviewer: Can you use the Notion-like editor without AI/Collaboration? 

If not, then you should say

```suggestion
Before running the app, configure the required constants inside `tiptap-collab-utils.ts`. This is necessary to enable features like AI or collaboration
```

### Environment Variables

Provide values for the following:

- `COLLAB_DOC_PREFIX` – Prefix for identifying collaborative documents

> - `TIPTAP_COLLAB_APP_ID` – Your collaboration App ID

Reviewer: Is there JWT token for collab?

Reviewer: Shouldn't there be an env variable like TIPTAP_COLLAB_JWT_TOKEN? Or am I mistaken?

- `TIPTAP_AI_APP_ID` – Your AI App ID
- `TIPTAP_AI_BASE_URL` – Base URL of your AI backend
- `TIPTAP_AI_TOKEN` – Token for accessing AI services

### JWT Authentication

Collaboration requires a valid server-generated JWT token passed to the editor. See the `fetchCollabToken` function in `tiptap-collab-utils.ts` for an example.

> > See the full guide on [JWT authentication](https://tiptap.dev/docs/guides/authentication).

Reviewer: Not related to this PR, but we should add a more complete code snippet on how the API endpoint that returns a JWT token would look like. Like, an example API endpoint built with Express. @svenadlung

> ### `room` Prop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `room` prop
```

- `image-upload-button`
- `link-popover`
- `list-button`, `list-dropdown-menu`
- `mark-button`
- `mention-dropdown-menu`
- `slash-dropdown-menu`
- `text-align-button`
- `turn-into-dropdown`
- `undo-redo-button`

### Nodes

- `code-block-node`
- `image-node`, `image-upload-node`
- `list-node`
- `paragraph-node`

### Notion-specific

- `notion-editor-header`
- `notion-toolbar-floating`
- `mobile-toolbar`
- `collaboration-users`
- `theme-toggle`

### Primitives

- `button`, `button-group`
- `dropdown-menu`
- `separator`, `spacer`, `toolbar`

### Contexts

- `app-context`
- `user-context`
- `collab-context`

## Collaboration

To use collaboration:

1. Pass a unique `room` ID to `NotionEditor`
2. Enable JWT auth for each user session
3. User presence and cursors are handled automatically
4. Operational transformation handles concurrent edits
5. Sync and save are managed out-of-the-box

```tsx
<NotionEditor room="team-notes" placeholder="Share your ideas..." />
```

## AI Integration

The built-in AI tools let you:

- **Generate content** from prompts
- **Improve** existing text
- **Get smart completions** based on context

<Callout title="AI Configuration" variant="info">

>   Make sure to configure your AI provider. Check the AI extension docs for setup steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Make sure to configure your AI provider. Check the [AI Generation extension docs](/content-ai/capabilities/generation/overview) for setup steps.
```

Import and render the `NotionEditor` component in your React app:

```tsx

> import { NotionEditor } from '@/components/tiptap-templates/notion/notion-like-editor'

Reviewer: Should the component be called NotionLikeEditor?? 👀

Author: This outdated. It should be use the correct name
